Welcome to the test set. Here we talk with some of the brightest thinkers and tinkerers
in statistical analysis, scientific computing, and machine learning, digging into what makes
them tick, plus the insights, experiments, and OMG moments that shape the field.
In this episode, we sit down with Charlie Marsh, the creator of Ruff, a mind-blowingly
fast Python linker. He's also the founder of Astral, where he and his team have built
tools like UBE for package management and TIE for type-checking, and I have to say they've
really taken the ecosystem by storm. Later in the conversation, Charlie talked about
his heavy use of AI for development, including whether his AI use reduces his team's confidence
in his PRs today. And regarding AI, he told us,
I think it's a hard time to be a leader. And I'm still chewing on that.
Alright, let's get to it.
Alright, Charlie, welcome to the test set. We're in Times Square, and joined by —
In New York City.
In New York City, I'm so sorry. Joined by my co-host, Wes McKinney. So excited to have
you on. I'm a giant fan of Ruff, and I know you started a company a few years ago, so
you're the CEO of Astral, making blazing fast Python tools. Thanks so much for coming on.
Absolutely. It's great to be here. I live here in New York. I don't come to Times Square
every day, so it's also exciting to be here in Times Square and on the show. Yeah, I'm
Charlie. I'm the founder and CEO of Astral. We build high-performance developer tools
focused on the Python ecosystem, so we're very focused on our open source tools. Ruff
is one that you mentioned. It's a static analysis tool, and then we also build UV, which is
a package management tool, and a couple others.
Yeah, awesome. Yeah, and I'm so excited. I saw you have Ty recently, too, which is doing
a lot of the type checking.
Yeah, exactly. Yep, yep. So we recently released a TY. It's our type checker and language server,
and so that came out of beta just before Christmas.
Yeah, awesome.
So, you know, we kind of work across — we think of it as like two domains. We build
a lot of static analysis tooling, so we have Ruff, which is our lender and formatter, TY,
which is our type checker and language server, and then we have UV, which is our package
manager, and then we also do our own builds of CPython. So there's kind of two big areas
that we play in in the open source.
Yeah. Yeah, I feel like it's wild. Like the past few years, I feel like Ruff, UV, and
I'm sure Ty have just taken over kind of everywhere, and I'm so curious to talk a little bit more
about those tools. And I do also want to flag, like I've seen a lot of your recent
tweets of using things like Cloud Code and AI.
Yep.
I'm so excited to get into both this really interesting set of blazing fast tooling, but
also this AI component that has sort of emerged, I feel like, over the last —
Yeah, 100%. Yeah, I'd love to go deep on that. I mean, I feel like work is changing so fast,
even month over month, like the way that I work, the way that I see our users working,
and even the way that we build our own tools, you know, Ruff, UV, Ty, the way that we've
tried to fold in Cloud Code and Codex and all these other tools has really changed how
we develop. I think it's also changing in ways that we, as an industry, haven't really
figured out. It's also changing open source in a lot of ways, and what the engagement
and the interactions look like between contributors, community, maintainers. So, yeah, I mean,
there's like no shortage of things to talk about there.
Yeah. I think one thing I'm curious about, like, before we jump into — I'm curious
to hear a little bit more about you and kind of how you got into software engineering and
stuff. How'd you get into the field?
Let's see. I mean, I taught myself to program the summer before I went to college, so that's
what I did with my summer classes. I read a textbook on programming with Java. Java
was my first programming language. And then by the time I got to school, I think I really
enjoyed it. I was pretty convicted that I wanted to study computer science, so I did.
I went to Princeton. I studied computer science, and from there, I've worked as a software
engineer ever since. So my first job out of school was at Khan Academy, an education technology
nonprofit. I was there for a couple of years, and then I went and worked at a computational
biology company, so I had no bio background. I also had really no, like, ML or computation
background, so I was largely responsible for the software infrastructure and the data infrastructure
and a lot of machine learning infrastructure that we built up over the course of a few
years. And, you know, it's like, I guess the way I look at why I started to work on all
this Python tooling was that, well, I think there were, like, a few threads that came
together. Like, one was everywhere I'd worked, we just had, like, a lot of Python, especially
when I was working at Spring, which was this, you know, AI-enabled biotech company. Like,
we were doing scientific computing, so we just had, like, tons and tons of Python. And
I was always on kind of small teams trying to do a lot, and so we were trying to take
advantage of tools. And Python, to me, always felt like a language that was succeeding in
spite of its tooling. Like, it just kept growing and growing and growing, but the tooling,
I mean, there were things happening, but it didn't quite feel like it was accelerating
the language.
Like, I remember the first time I met you, I was introduced to Charlie when he was just
starting Astral, so we'd never met before that. And I think I had just heard about RUF,
or, like, it was just RUF at that point. And so I remember meeting with you and thinking,
I'm like, okay, like, he seems really smart, there's RUF, RUF's clearly very fast, it's
a linter. I was like, okay, a company for a linter.
How could a linter be a company?
Right, right, right. But, like, oh, he seems really motivated, so, yeah, like, you know,
let him run with that and see what happens. But I think it's, to me, it's honestly amazing
what you and the team have pulled off, like, in a very, in a short amount of time.
Oh, thank you.
Because, in a sense, like, the, you know, I've been involved in Python for a long time,
for, you know, it's almost 20 years now. I think I started doing Python in 2007.
Wow, powerful.
And so, like, things have obviously grown and changed a lot, a lot during that time.
And there was, but there was always, like, this feeling that, that with each passing
year, that, like, Python is getting better and worse at the same time, if that makes
sense.
Yeah, yeah.
Oh, like, we have all these nice tools and libraries and things, and look at all these
problems we can solve. And the community of Python developers is getting bigger, and more
and more people are choosing Python. I remember just getting from the point where Python was
a language that was, like, a niche, like, hacker language, or something that was, like,
a little bit underground. Like, you had to be an enthusiast. If you ever remember, like,
Paul Graham's, you know, Python paradox essay.
I was going to say, yeah, yeah.
So, a lot of people were choosing Python, but it was not a popular thing. Like, the
fact that, like, companies such as Dropbox were using Python was considered avant-garde.
Like, oh, Reddit uses, Reddit uses Python. So, people would talk about companies using
Python, but it wasn't a mainstream, a mainstream language. And so, somewhere in the early 2010s,
it crossed the chasm from being, like, not a mainstream language to being a mainstream
language. But then there was this kind of explosion of, like, tools and development
and different things. And then you had, like, everyone grappling with, like, gosh, like,
how do we, like, manage our environments? How do we deploy our code? And basically,
just things turned into this giant, like, giant tangled mess where, like, you know,
every project was doing things a little bit different way. And so, you, you know, companies
would do things differently and be like, oh, we're using, you know, this packaging and,
you know, virtual management tool. And, like, oh, we're using Conda over here. Or, like,
there's many different ways you can install and deal with Conda. And there's different
package channels. And, like, it was just a giant, a giant mess that was, like, everyone
would complain about and was making nobody, nobody happy. And then there was also, like,
the, like, the friction between the scientific data, like, data machine learning ecosystem,
now the AI ecosystem, and the traditional, like, OG, you know, Python web developer community.
And so, you had folks who don't, didn't have any compiled code at all, like, no C extensions,
no Rust extensions. Maybe this was even pre-Rust, like, that we weren't even thinking about
Rust at that point. And so, we would have these conversations. I remember, at one point,
we talked to, you know, we talked to Guido van Rosum about, the creator of Python, about
the whole packaging conundrum and how it's a giant mess. And his reaction was kind of
like, oh, well, maybe you should, you know, build your own packaging and installation
solution, you know, to solve this problem. So, I think that...
And that became Conda, right?
And that became, yeah, that became Conda and, like, what's now, you know, CondaForge and
all that. But, yeah, I think the fact that you stormed onto the scene and made a difference
in a short amount of time is, like, considering how many failed attempts there were at doing
that is, frankly, kind of amazing. And so, like, I think one question I have is, like,
what, you know, kind of, you know, what made you decide, like, you know, I can fix this,
like, I'm going to do this, you know? Like, you know, did you kind of visualize, like,
where things would be today and, like, how rapidly the Python ecosystem could change
and then, like, what are some of the things that you think, like, what were the catalysts,
like, what was the tipping point or, like, how do you feel like that rapid, you know,
hockey stick type growth for UV in particular happened?
Yeah, yeah, definitely. So, I think when I decided to work on this full time and start
a company and bring people on board, like, I certainly didn't have everything figured
out. I mean, I probably still don't, although I hope I have, like, better ideas now than
I did then around how, you know, how the company will grow. But I did have at least a clear
set of things that I thought we could build. And for me, it was really, like, rough was
really starting to succeed. And I think it was also showing me evidence that people would
change their tools, like, if you could do a few things, right? Like, one, you had to
build something that people, that I know was and people really believed was significantly
better than whatever they were using. Like, it's very hard to get people to switch tools
if it's going to require, like, a bunch of changes in their workflow and it's only, like,
a little bit better in, like, these one or two ways. Like, why would anyone spend time
on that? And with rough, I think the way that I tried to view it was, okay, we want
it to be, like, very compatible with your own tools today. And, you know, like, orders
of magnitude faster, hopefully. And so for a lot of teams, it was, like, well, if it's,
like, you know, if it's, like, drop-in compatible and it's, like, orders of magnitude faster,
like, why, you can't even try to invert the calculus around, like, well, why wouldn't
I switch? Like, we should, we should do it. And, you know, I think the project was also
bolstered a lot by early adopters who were, like, willing, who had important projects
and big presences and were willing to give it a shot. Like, Sebastian Ramirez from FastAPI,
like, he was pretty early in the issue tracker asking for things. And I was, like, okay.
Or, you know, or, like, Samuel Colvin from Pydantic. It's, like, okay, if we can, I just
thought, if we're just kind of ruthless about, like, thinking about what those people need
and order some migrate and, like, really focus on trying to do those things, I think
it gave the product, the tool, a lot more social credibility early on. So, you know,
a couple of projects migrating over. And then we started to get, like, projects that are
much more established, like SciPy, you know, like migrating over. And I was, like, okay,
if, like, that's happening, if those projects that have been around for decades are willing
to adopt this sort of radical, like, Rust-based tool where I'm shipping a release, like, every
day and I have no versioning policy and, like, blah, blah, blah, then to me that was basically
fine that there was a lot of demand if we could build something that was really good.
I think I always assumed that the packaging adoption curve would be much more difficult
because it's, you know, it's closer to production. There's, like, a lot more ways that people
work. People are very ingrained in their workflows. And I think we did a couple of things right
there. Like, one is we started with this UV pip interface that, like, actually when we
first shipped UV, that was all there was. And a lot of people were, like, oh, that's
weird. Why is it, like, UV pip? It should just be UV install, blah, blah, blah. But
it was very intentional. It was, like, that's kind of, like, our compatibility layer.
It's kind of the old world.
Yeah, in some ways. And, like, I think, you know, people didn't realize what we were even
pitching with the new world at that point, which is fine. But it was, like, that was
the thing that we shipped to start.
And just in case, I think UV's kind of, like, taken over the world. But just in case someone
hasn't heard of UV, how would you, like, explain it kind of to a general?
Yeah, yeah, of course. Yeah, I mean, I think I view UV as our sort of, like, all-in-one
Python packaging binary or toolkit. So, you know, it's a single binary that you install
that will install Python for you, you know, manage your Python installations. And those
are Pythons that we build. It'll automatically create virtual environments for you. It'll
automatically lock and resolve your dependencies across platforms.
So it's, you know, it's designed to be extremely fast. And like our other tools, we really
thought about in building it, you know, we wanted to build the entire stack in, like,
a very cohesive way. I think one of the things that's been hard in Python tooling is you
often have, like, lots of different tools that are built separately or built on top
of one another. And, you know, for us, it was like, okay, we're actually going to try
and do, like, you know, basically everything ourselves from, maybe except the runtime.
Like, we do our own Python build, so we don't have our own runtime. But then it's like
the virtual environment layer, the lock file, the resolver, the package installer, you know,
it's all one system. And when we launched, you know, we had this, we were very focused
on compatibility because we were, we wanted to build something that was easy to adopt
that demonstrated, you know, the performance piece and let us get something out and get
it, you know, battle tested. So, like, we just had, like, UV pip install, UV VMs.
Like, these were basically, they were meant to be very close to drop-in replacements
for, or drop-in alternatives for, like, you know, pip and virtualenv. And that actually
grew a lot. But after six months or so, we launched, like, a whole new interface,
which was, like, UV run, UV lock, UV sync. And that was, you should be able to clone
a project. You just do, like, UV run. And then we resolve the dependencies, install
Python, create the virtual environment, like, wire the dependencies up to your runtime and
run the command. And, like, all of that should happen without you having to really think
about it.
I'm so curious. I know, like, RUF, like, between releasing RUF and I think between
releasing UV, you started a company.
Yes.
And became CEO.
Yeah.
And, you know, so you're using, like, Wealot with UV. I'm really curious the kind of design
and the process that went into that from being, like, I'd imagine when you were building
RUF, you were sort of, like, a solo creator.
Yeah.
And kind of up to the point of UV, you might have had a crew.
Can you tell us, like, a little bit about that?
Yeah, yeah, of course. Yeah, I mean, building RUF was, like, I mean, at least the version,
you know, up until the first, we hired our first team member, it started, like, March
2023. So it was actually, actually, between starting a company and hiring our first team
member, I also had a kid. So it was a really crazy period in my life. But, so, like, RUF,
yeah, the initial RUF code base, it was me sort of figuring out how to do things. I think,
like, I think our code quality has gone up a lot over time, especially as we've hired
people who are much better than me at RUF or more experienced than me at RUF. But, yeah,
we, like, you know, we started working on RUF. And we grew the team. We've always grown
the team. The word I often use is, like, you know, deliberately. Like, we're usually hiring,
but we're not usually, like, hiring, like, a million people. So, you know, we grew the
team from, like, one to two to three to four. I think when we launched UV, we were, we might
have been, like, six or seven total.
Are you all remote?
Yes, we're all remote. So I'm here in New York. We have two other people here in New
York. I mean, they just sort of happened to be here in New York. And then we have team
members. We're about 23 now. And we have team members from Pacific all the way through to
CET, like, Germany, Switzerland. And then we also have one team member in India. So
we, like, yeah, I mean, we try to span, like, a lot of time zones and learn to work together
remotely, you know, in an effective way. But I would say, like, you know, in terms of building
out the team, it's been pretty amazing. Like, I think I'm, like, stunned at the quality
of the team that we've been able to put together. And, you know, I think a lot of that is we're
kind of a unique and different company. Like, they're just, you know, if you want to work
on programming language tooling, like, written in Rust, and now we have, like, massive distribution
with the stuff we've built. So everything we ship, you know, has a really big impact.
You know, open source, remote, it's, like, we've been able to bring in, like, I think
a really amazing team. And, you know, there were sort of, like, a couple, I guess, philosophical
points that I've thought about over time with building the team. Like, one is we've kind
of, like, intentionally tried to hire people from outside the Python ecosystem. So we've
brought in, because I wanted to bring in, like, a lot of these different ideas from,
like, how other programming ecosystems work. So we've brought in a bunch of people from,
you know, I think that would be best known for, like, their work in the Rust ecosystem,
for example. Mika, who was, like, the third person to join the team, had, like, basically
never written any Python before, and almost, but he built very similar tooling for TypeScript.
And so he brought a lot of, you know, just, like, knowledge about what it looks like to
build these tools correctly, but in a different context. And I've learned, like, so much from
him. At the same time, we have, I think it's really important that, like, everything we
do, all of our success, basically, I think comes from having a really good understanding
of our users. It's not, like, a unique observation. Like, I think most companies would say that.
But, like, for us, it's, like, a lot of the ideas for Ruff and UV came from our own time
working in Python. So we've also brought in people who have been involved in the Python
ecosystem for a very long time, like Karl Mayer on our team was, like, one of the authors
of the virtual MFAP, and he was very involved in Django early on. And so, you know, we try
to make this mix of people with very different programming backgrounds, and, like, and bring
them together in a very collaborative and fun environment. And I think that's been really
successful for, you know, for trying to build tools that work for a lot of different people.
I mean, I think, to your point, it's, like, building in Python is very, it's interesting
and it's challenging because it's, like, every company on earth is using Python for something
within, like, some margin of error, right, for something. But, like, the things they're
doing can be super different. Like, you know, some companies, it's, like, they're building
a huge web application, it's a giant monorepo that's, like, all Python. Some companies,
it's, like, they're all Ruby, but, like, they have an AIML or data science team, and, like,
they're obviously all using Python. Some are, like, research labs, even that's pretty different.
Some are, like, it's all build scripting or networking or whatever else. And so you're
building it for, like, a very, very diverse user base, and we're trying to build things
that work both for beginners but can scale to enormous projects. So we've put all these
hard design constraints in place where we're trying to satisfy all these different people.
I think we do a good job managing it, but to me it feels quite different than, I mean,
the TypeScript ecosystem is absolutely enormous, but, like, most people building in TypeScript
are building web applications, and the applications can be very complicated. Like, it's not to
say that they aren't, but, like, the user story, I think, is a little bit more straightforward.
I mean, there are people doing all sorts of things with TypeScript, but, like, you know,
by and large, a lot of people are building web applications or websites. And so for us,
it's, like, we have our feet in all these different communities. I mean, just like Python
is.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think from what I've seen, you know, from, like, the segment of
the Python ecosystem that I come from, you know, originally the SciPy, NumPy, scientific
computing ecosystem, which turned into, like, now the PyData, you know, data ecosystem.
Yep.
And now, of course, it's, you know, all AI and, like, all the most popular Python repositories
on GitHub are AI-related. I actually looked at, like, the top 100 Python repositories
by GitHub stars, and most of them I haven't even heard of. There's something related to
AI or LLMs.
Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's totally mind-blowing. But it's interesting because I think in my world, like, I've had
a lot of exposure to companies that have a lot of stuff that's written in Python, but
then a lot of other software which is not written in Python, and stuff that has to be, you know,
built and deployed.
Yep.
And so often it's not library software, but it's stuff that has to be built and deployed
with the Python. And that's why, like, even still, for many years and even still, like,
I became a big proponent of the, you know, like the Conda, CondaForge way of doing things,
basically a, you know, cross-language binary packaging system where you can have all of
your system libraries, like all of your C, C++ libraries, Rust libraries.
Can you give some context to Conda? Like, what's Conda to kind of a general?
Yeah, so Conda is a packaging tool originally written in Python. Now there's a C++ package
resolver installer, like parallel resolver installer backend called Mamba or LibMamba
that powers Conda. But originally it was all written in Python. It was developed by Continuum
Analytics, which is now Anaconda. And it was basically like an evolved approach to Python
packaging that would allow you to package Python libraries, but also non-Python application
dependencies. And so the idea is that you could have an application that has R in it
or that has, you know, something written really in any programming language, like you could
imagine as being like a non-OS specific version of a Linux distribution. So if you think about
like using apt or yum or a Linux package manager, you have access to this whole compendium of
like all these libraries and tools that have been packaged so that they can be installed
in Linux. And so whenever you're doing like apt install, you know, this tool, apt install
that tool, you don't care what programming language that is as long as the libraries
and the bin files end up in the right place. And so Conda is like that except that it works
on every OS and it's not OS dependent. So you can have a single Conda environment definition
that you can use on Windows, you can use on Mac OS, you can use on Linux. And they figured
out how to like make the binaries that ship in a Conda package channel portable across
Linux distributions. Python also had to solve the same problem of like Linux distribution
portability for binaries, like with the many Linux specifications. So Conda essentially
was like a whole parallel world that was created for like, you know, initially for
solving packaging and distribution for polyglot stacks. So like, yes, Python, but also all
the other things like a lot of the banks in New York City like our Conda users because
they have large, complex C++ code bases that they need to package and version. Right. And
version pin alongside their Python libraries. And so using pip to manage everything or now
UV to manage everything actually wouldn't be practical because you would have to figure
out how to take those non-Python things and turn them into things that UV and pip can
install. But this is interesting because this is actually the exact problem that all the
AI libraries have had to solve to figure out how to get like PyTorch and like all the CUDA,
you know, gigabytes of CUDA runtime libraries just magically pip installing. There was a
period of time where you actually couldn't pip install and get all the, you know, things
went through like a messy period where you could pip install PyTorch, but there were
like PyTorch versions for different versions of the CUDA runtime. Right. And it was just
a giant mess and very painful for everyone. And so I can imagine like with the rapid growth
and everyone wanting to be able to, you know, UV pip install or UV add like packages that
depend on, you know, complex. Essentially it's like the Python part is the small part.
It's actually like this, these gigabytes of like, you know, CUDA libraries and stuff,
all the packages depend on that also now have to get installed. Otherwise people get into
this morass of like, oh, I have to go to the NVIDIA website and figure out like, oh, this
Python package depends on what version of the CUDA runtime. Like make sure I install
exactly that version. Yeah. And I don't have like a version conflict where like it doesn't
link when I, you know, import the Python. I've of course suffered greatly from these
problems over the years. So I feel like you've solved it. Like this problem has been solved
at least for the AI stack, but still there's a lot of other underserved applications that
like, if you want to have Python and other stuff, like I think Conda is probably still
the right solution, but maybe in the fullness of time, like kind of the UV world can expand
to like maybe solve that problem and do it better. Just kind of like recap, you're saying
like Conda, like if I want to install Geopandas as a classic thing, it's like Geopandas has
some Python, but also like a bunch of other libraries. Well, I'm sure that you can install
Geopandas with pip, but what happens with the Python package index where, so like where
I understand you're also building an alternative to the Python package index or maybe something
like that. We can talk more about that. But the idea is that whenever you deploy a library
like PyArrow or Geopandas to the Python package index, there is a requirement on the Python
package index that all of those binary packages that you deploy are self-contained. And so
any system libraries that they depend on, so if they're C or C++ libraries or Rust libraries
that your package depends on, those have to all be fully self-contained. So they have
to be either bundled and ship inside the wheel, like inside the Python package, or they have
to be statically linked inside your C extensions that are inside the library. And so the outcome
of that, you know, for better or for worse, is that whenever you pip install stuff or
you pip install stuff, you end up with a lot of libraries that have all these C and C++
libraries that have been statically linked. So just tying back to UV, you're saying Conda
solves a really big problem. Like if I'm pip installing and it requires like other things,
I'm going to have a bad time. But UV has made a really good time in Python. Like it's
fast. Are you wondering like will UV cover the non-Python part?
Yeah, I don't want to go too far down the technical rabbit hole because a lot of people
will be like, oh my gosh, what is Wes talking about? But just to give you an example, so
there's one library that often ends up statically linked into Python packages is gRPC. So that's
Google's kind of RPC kind of messaging library. And so there's a lot of projects that have,
they need to use gRPC, but if you want to use gRPC, you have to statically link it.
And so you might install two Python packages that have different versions of gRPC, which
also depends on protobuf. And so there's situations that people get into where they import Python
libraries in the wrong order and they get some kind of weird like linker error because
there's some conflict whenever the two libraries load, they're like incompatible statically
linked versions of lib protobuf. And this is still a problem that plagues us greatly.
And so the better scenario would be if the offending library dependency, lib protobuf
or lib gRPC, is actually something that can be managed by UV. And so it isn't having to
be statically linked. And the static linking is something that's required by the Python
package index. And so I'm optimistic because I think this is a problem that Charlie can
solve.
This is you.
He's solved all these other problems.
Lighting a candle. I'm getting to Charlie. Charlie, please.
I believe in Charlie.
We brought you on here.
Well, I mean, I actually feel kind of lucky because I think we started building UV at
a moment in time where it became very practical in some sense to build because there was a
lot of work that happened in standards in the years that preceded working on UV. Like
I think it would have been a lot harder to build UV like a few years before.
You mean like pyproject.toml?
Yeah, yeah. Just like there were a bunch of Python standards that happened that formalized
like, formalized various behaviors or made it so more things were available statically
and you didn't have to depend on Python to do a bunch of other things. And I remember
I think there was a, I'll probably misparaphrase this slightly, but after we released UV, one
of the reactions that I saw from a PIP maintainer was something along the lines of like, I actually
think it's great that this is possible. Like it's very good for ecosystem for there to
be multiple installers that follow the same spec and the same standard. And the fact that
maybe ending the paraphrase, now me talking, you know, like I think the fact that that's
possible is actually very good for the ecosystem. Like you, that you could have, you know, you
don't just have PIP as a de facto standard of how things work. You have like a set of
standards that are written down and codified and evolved through a governance process and
then tools can actually implement those. And so, you know, I think it was, that wasn't
even obvious to me when we started working on it. It was only obvious once I got deeper
into packaging because that, that there were a bunch of things where we were basically
like implementing written standards that were pretty new and the ecosystem had just evolved
a lot. And I think, you know, it's similar with, you know, bundling like extension modules
like Python packages where, you know, you're including Rust or C or C++ code or Fortran
or whatever else, like that is now like so normal. And there's been a lot of standards
work to make that, you know, I think at the period of time when Conda emerged, that was
not seen as something that the Python ecosystem was treating as a priority. And now it's like,
that's like the superpower of Python, at least from my perspective. It's like the fact that
you can do that, I think is really amazing. And we're continuing to try and like push
the standards there. Like we're working on a proposal with people from NVIDIA and PyTorch
that we call like wheel variants. That's, I mean, it's now up for comments. So it'll
be like a big debate around whether that actually happens. But like, there's still
a lot of, I think, evolution in terms of like those problems and how this is for that, like,
you know, Kudo runtime version. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is for being able to encode
like right now when you build a Python, you know, a file someone can install with Python,
you encode certain things like the operating system, like Windows, Linux, Mac OS, and maybe
like the CPU architecture, like x86 or ARM. But there's a bunch of stuff that you can't
really encode in any way. Like, does it depend on Kuda or if so, like what driver version
does it need? And so this is trying to sort of generalize that problem in a way that,
like, I think parts of it are definitely like learning from the Conda ecosystem and kind
of looking at like how Conda approach things. And that's sort of like what I always view
as like the most important part of standards and like language and ecosystem design is
like you have to learn from what other people have done. You don't have to do exactly what
they did, but you should be very curious about why they made certain choices and how
this has played out. So, yeah, that's just to say, like, I think Python packaging is
still evolving a lot and, you know, I'm optimistic that we can push it forward. There are also
things that we've done in UV that have then, you know, either there are like ambiguities
around how things should behave and then it leads to a lot of clarification of like, well,
the spec isn't clear about this. Like, what should we do? Or, you know, things we've done
in UV that have then turned into standards proposals, which has been cool to see. So
I feel like that is an interesting kind of challenge or maybe like design path to with
like rough and UV of like ambiguities or like I know a lot of these tools you mentioned
like compatibility. Yeah. So like really being sure that it kind of enhances people's experience
but is often compatible with say like pip or like rough used a lot of existing kind
of linting rules. Yep. Just a great kind of like bootstrap or like steps to it feels
like into the tool because it's like often things people already know. Yeah. I'm curious
like that that philosophy like how that's worked out kind of like as you've kicked the
tools off and like as the tools mature. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we I would say we've we try
to be like very intentional about where we knowingly are incompatible or like make very
different decisions. We try to like document those like, you know, an example would be
it, you know, with with with PIP and with UV. If you try to install packages across
multiple different indexes, like maybe you have your own private index and pipe and you
want to configure the tool to look at both how the tools make decisions about like which
one to look in and where to get packages from are different. And that was like a very
intentional choice that we made largely because we thought, you know, like people are everyone
has different opinions. We thought our design was like more more secure. And and so we did
we did that. We got like a lot of user complaints about it. But it was because people were like
this is different. And and, you know, in some sense, that's very justified. But in another
like, we were very we try to be very principled about like where we I guess I would say break
compatibility or where we do something different. And then we also try to like listen, you know,
so like we there are some areas where we like really changed our mind about things like
I remember the details around this, but like a week or two after we shipped UV, we made
like a pretty big breaking change because there was like a very confusing behavior on
like what counts as a project and what doesn't and like blah, blah, blah. And like we were
constantly getting reports like we're getting tons of reports of people being just confused
about this behavior. And we were like, OK, like we took a very principled stance on that,
but it's like clearly not working out. And so we were willing to like correct course.
So I think like, you know, being open minded about it and also being mindful of like where
the tool is at in its maturity cycle. Like, you know, I said this earlier, but when we
were when I was working on Rough initially, I was shipping a new release like like literally
every day, sometimes twice a day. And, you know, they would have all sorts of things.
Sometimes they would have breaking changes. And it sort of got to the point where like
I would ship a release and there were almost always within like five or ten minutes be
an issue that was like some kind of regression or something that broke people's workflows.
And there was a moment where I kind of had to change my act like that. That way of working
makes sense for a project at a certain stage in its life. But as the project became more
mature, we had to get like way more serious about, you know, how often we ship, having
a clear versioning policy, a lot of QA and yeah, a lot of QA, all that kind of stuff.
So like we, you know, we just like evolved that a lot over time. And I mean, in some
ways it's like a productivity tax, but it's like a very important one to pay. Like we
you know, eventually we put in a versioning policy. So now we like we do not ship breaking
changes outside of we use like patch and minor release. But, you know, the point is like
we have like a very clear versioning policy. We ship more like once a week, you know, all
that kind of stuff. We have a whole like preview system whereby we whenever we add new features
by and large, we put them under preview flags. And then there's like a period where we take
commentary on it and we sort of like reserve the right to make breaking changes like all
the preview flags are up. So, you know, it's just like changing over the course of time,
like how the project works and how it operates, I think is pretty important. Like it's fine
to ship breaking changes if you're like a very new thing. But eventually like the project
gets adopted and you have to view like how you release and how you ship very differently.
Yeah. Yeah. It's really interesting because these are such big projects and communities.
I thought maybe to shift a bit. I know I saw you. You've mentioned a lot about like
cloud code and using like AI and cloud code quite a bit.
Oh, well, one thing I wanted to say on that is like I think one of the reasons I've become
such a big fan of UV is actually because of actually because of AI.
For real. Yeah.
Because it's one thing we didn't really talk about is that one of the problems that UV
solves that is this whole problem of like I made a thing. I want you to run my thing
because it used to be that you had to say, oh, like you got to create a virtual and then
you got to like you got to install it and activate the virtual. And it was this whole
you know, this whole kind of nightmare. But yeah, but now now I can say here's my Python
script. Just you run this and don't forget it. And so I think that was like I think that
feature was developed like pre coding, you know, pre AI, but yet is also like the killer
app for for making it like self-contained, runnable things that are outputted by outputting
outputted by coding.
I mean, it's real. I do feel like step zero of like cloud code with Python is ensure that
it's using UV. It's like people's number one priority. Just like.
Yeah, it's like we're always using UV. Do not do not pip install. If I see a pip installing
or using pip, I'm like escape. Like, no, do not. Yeah, no, only only UV. Yeah, it will
still ignore me sometimes, but.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I think the models are getting better about it over time. Like, I think there's
more, hopefully, like RLing in the labs.
I think there are also Python users. And so I think they are. They're also on the leading
edge.
They're also users.
Yeah. Well, anyway, I guess to Michael's point, like curious, like on your, you know, your
journey with with AI, like we were looking and, you know, you've been doing stuff with
AI and large language models for a lot longer than than many people.
Yeah, it's kind of freaky.
You're interested just like, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Just how things, how things have developed.
Yeah.
What you know, how you write, you know, what your current workflow looks like and, you
know, what's been your path to getting there.
And for a little bit of context, I saw in like 2022, you had a experiment called Autobot.
Like you were.
Yeah, I feel like you were kind of on the leading edge, like tinkering with.
Yeah, Autobot was like that was one of the projects I was working on when I also started
working on Ruff.
I had a couple of different projects going and that was like it was like AI assisted
code, code mods, refactoring.
So you would.
I mean, it's something that sounds like really trivial now because how much everything has
changed.
But it was like you would give it a few examples and then it would find others in your code
base to apply the same pattern.
I mean, you know, it's straightforward, but but it was very early for that.
Yeah.
It's actually mind blowing for me to hear that you were working on Ruff and Autobot
at the same time.
It was the same time.
Yeah, yeah.
But yeah, I mean, I think my like.
I mean, I've gone through, yeah, like just so much change.
I mean, even comparing like November to now, I think the way I work is like really different.
And, you know, for me, like I think the first.
Like there was a long period of time where, you know, I was in like IntelliJ IDs, like
just using copilot for tab completion, and that was like a big step up from, you know,
normal tab completion.
And then I remember I'd go on an airplane and I'd find it very hard to write code because
I couldn't tab complete.
And, you know, of course, that's even more intense now.
But there was a there was I remember that kind of shift for me, you know, and then I
was on.
Then I started using cursor.
And again, that was really about.
The really great tab completion that felt like it was predicting what I wanted to do
next and jumping me around the file and across files and the command case sort of like more
targeted editing where I'd like highlight a bunch of code and I'd say rewrite this to
do X, Y and Z or like give me an implementation for A and B.
But I wasn't really using agents very much.
And I just felt I was pretty bearish on them, I guess, because I'm short sighted and I
wasn't.
I was like they weren't feeling reliable.
I was like, I just don't feel like I can trust the code.
So, you know, there was a long period of time, like I think a lot of last year where I was
I wasn't really using agents and and but I was using cursor, for example, really heavily
and and for Python and Rust.
And I felt like I felt like for a long time, like the models were way better at Python
than they were at Rust.
And I think that also impacted my own maybe like adoption or perspectives on things, because
I, I, I mostly write Rust, but are like our hosted product PYX is written in Python, like
a lot of it's in Python.
And that's actually a very intentional choice because we want to be using our own tools
to build a thing, which I think has been really good.
But it's like, so I'm writing a lot of Python and a lot of Rust.
I'm just did something.
What did the scales for you?
So like you mentioned using like AI for like suggestions or kind of really beefed up autocomplete
and then now it seems like you are using agents a lot.
I'm curious if something shifted or something.
Yeah.
I mean, now for me, I mean, I still use my editor, but it's mostly for a reading code
or maybe making touch-ups if I have like a complicated change that I want to like finish
up, you know, on my own.
I would say like since, you know, at least since the beginning of December, you know,
maybe earlier, I am like exclusively using like Cloud Code and Codex.
And I really just run those locally.
I don't really use the web products too much.
Although people on some people on my team do.
Some people on our team do.
I, so, you know, basically everything I'm doing now is going through Cloud Code or Codex.
I think, you know, there's, I mean, there's like so many people are writing about this
and there's so many things to say about it.
So what I do locally, it's like I, I'm typically working on a bunch of things at once.
I think that's actually kind of been the big unlock for me is I, it's not always the case
that it can do any one thing like way faster or way better than I could, but it can do,
I can parallelize or multitask like a lot more.
I'm using it.
This is also true for Rust.
Like I think the models have gotten like significantly better at Rust.
And so for TY, for UV, for Rust, any change I make there will start with a Cloud Code session.
And then same for PYX or for anything else that we do.
So, you know, the way I work now is like I have, maybe I'll have like four terminals open.
You know, I'm not doing like 20 different terminals, like all YOLOing on something.
Just four.
Yeah, it's more intentional than that.
It's like I'm working on four changes and like, you know, once it's done, I'm kind of like reading the code,
like prompting more, maybe like, maybe going in and making like some edits myself.
I would say increasingly though, when there are small things I wanted to change,
I'm telling it the small things I wanted to change rather than editing the code myself.
So, I mean, I think the main thing that I'm like, yeah, agents are like,
they're just becoming like more and more capable.
I do think it is absolutely like using them well is a skill like anything else.
And I think it's very easy to use them poorly and also to get burned on them and think they're not useful
because their build is this magical thing.
And then you try it, you know, if you just sort of walk in and try it for something and it doesn't do it right
or it makes one of the mistakes that I would recognize as like the unobvious thing that an LLM might get wrong,
like, okay, yeah, it tells me something that's not true.
A lot of people will have that interaction and they're like, I can't trust it for anything.
I actually think that's not right.
Like, I think it's a skill like anything else to figure out how to use them well,
when to accept what they believe, like how to get them to validate it.
Like, it's obviously bad if the thing is telling you something that's not true.
But I think as you use it more and more, you start to identify like why that would happen, how you can avoid it.
So, I view it as like very much as a skill that like you can get better and stronger at.
And, you know, I think a big thing that I say a lot with the team is like, you know, like I said earlier,
so much of our success has come from having a deep understanding of our users.
And increasingly, our users are like building with agents.
And so, even if like we don't want to like build with agents for whatever reason,
like we sort of have a responsibility to because at least I feel that way.
Because I need to have a really good understanding, I think, of how people are working and how programming is changing,
how people are using our tool.
Like, that's why like PYX being written in Python, we have a big Python project where we're using uv-rough-ty.
So, if you're not building like large applications in Python, then you're not expecting what it's like.
Yeah, exactly. And with agents, right?
And so, I think we're like, you know, as a team, we're sort of like this, you know, this mass of people
all trying to figure out how to use these tools in different ways.
And we're like learning a lot from each other, but it's also changing super fast.
And I think the best thing, at least from my perspective, the best thing we can be doing is just like experimenting
and like trying things and like viewing that as a core part of the job, I think,
to like learn and understand how this stuff works.
Do you have any advice for people maybe like looking to contribute to like rough or uv or things like that
who are dipping their toes into agents?
It's a challenging time.
Yeah, I would say, I mean, there are certainly a lot of projects that have publicly put out AI policies
in different ways.
Like, I think TLDraw stopped accepting external PR or something to that effect.
And then I know like Ghosty.
I think, you know, they have a very specific AI policy.
We're not there yet.
I think it's almost guaranteed that we will be.
But I think the thing that's challenging is like writing, like getting, putting up code,
sorry, writing the code, a draft of the code is like not expensive.
Like that is the cheap and easy part.
The hard thing is validating correctness, you know, thinking hard about the architecture,
like all these things that come downstream of writing code.
And so increasingly what we see is like, you know, interaction that like,
I don't really know what we do about this, but it just doesn't really make sense,
is like we have an issue, a contributor takes it, they just, you know, drop it into Cloud Code
and say like fix and link to the issue.
And then they just put up the PR, right?
And then it's like, what's the, no, but it's sort of like, what's the point of that?
Because like I could just do that, right?
And the hard part is what happens after, which is we have a bunch of,
we have to give a bunch of feedback, we have to think hard about the change,
we have to think hard about how you validate it.
And, you know, if the person who puts it up hasn't done that work or thought about doing that work,
like that's actually, that is like the hard part, right?
It's like I can prompt the agent.
A lot of like, you know, I guess I call them slop PRs, you know, and so like I've even heard.
Well-intentioned.
Yeah, well-intentioned.
Often, often well-intentioned.
But it's like, you know, if someone, it does create a weird dynamic because for us it's like we get a huge PR,
we kind of have to like think through like, well, how do we engage with this?
Like is the person going to engage if we ask them hard follow-up questions?
Or maybe they're like, you know, we have all these questions like, well, what should I do next?
And we're like, well, that's actually the hard part is like we don't really know what you should do next.
Like you have to kind of like do the work of figuring out like how do we develop confidence in the change.
And so I think, you know, we're sort of trying to figure out like how to, it's not,
and it's not even exclusive to open source contributors.
There are like elements of this too that happen like within the team.
Like I got some feedback, which I thought, which I really appreciated,
which was that people on the team felt like they couldn't trust my PRs as much anymore,
which is like completely fair, completely fair and very interesting.
Because the point was like, you know, previously when people were reviewing my changes within the team,
you know, they didn't feel like they had to review them super closely.
Like they trusted my work a lot.
And now it's like if I'm putting up a PR that's done by Cloud Code,
like I am, like empirically I'm putting up code that has patterns or mistakes or issues in it
that I just wouldn't have put up before.
Do you feel like your trust or confidence in your PRs stayed the same?
Like, no, I mean definitely gone down.
Fair.
Like I think I'm still a lot more productive, but like this is why it's like,
I think it's like a very challenging moment to like figure out how to think about these things.
Like I, you know, and sometimes too I'm like, you know, a bunch of stuff gets pointed out on a PR.
Like, sorry, what it took for me to realize this by the way was I put up a PR
and I will try to review my PRs myself first,
but it's a little different when it's code that you've been close to and like writing.
But I put up a PR and I thought it was like fine.
And then I got like a lot of feedback from someone on our team who's great.
And, you know, he like looked at it really closely and he gave me like a lot of like real feedback.
He's like, this is like not, like this is unused.
Like this is, why are we doing this here?
Like why aren't we using the implementation we have from over here?
All these problems that I hadn't really noticed.
And so like getting a review from someone who wasn't using an agent at all
and was a domain expert and was thinking really carefully about it.
Like I've just had to, over time I'm trying to build up the philosophy
that I'm still responsible for my own code.
Because it's very easy to forget that when the agents are just like turning stuff out
and you're like this looks good.
Yeah, I mean lately like I've been on this journey of essentially, you know,
I think I'm also in the same place that you are now where like I'm primarily using,
you know, primarily using cloud code to implement.
So like my workflow is I have a bunch of stack terminals,
usually three or four or five cloud code sessions.
I work on different projects in parallel because, you know,
while I'm busy working on one thing, I can work on something else.
And so like I've enjoyed like the productivity benefit of being able to like
nudge along work and on multiple things or like multiple, you know,
work trees within the same project.
But like, you know, like you, like I've run into the same problem of the code quality
just being, you know, often poor, surprising.
I mean it has certainly gotten a lot better, but there's like this like
code quality problem either of like solving the problem in a much more verbose way
or with a lot of code duplication, like copy and pasting the same thing,
especially like the test suites end up like much bigger and much more bloated
and duplicated.
And I'm like one of these, I'm like obsessed with like code cleanliness
and like not repeating yourself and not having code duplication.
And so like, you know, code smells.
I built a lintel.
Yeah, you know a thing or two about this.
Yeah, so whenever I open up these code bases, I look at the PR.
I'm like, ooh, this is like, you know, as far as code smells, like this is,
you know, stinky, stinky cheese level of code smell.
But, you know, I feel like there's certainly like the human element of code review
is important.
And I think like for you, the agent user, I think part of it is your responsibility
to like, you know, do as much of that before putting a PR so that you aren't
like essentially asking other people to do all of the review labor.
And so like I've been trying to figure out how to do that.
I've also been investing a lot in like what I call adversarial code review tools
because if you ask Quad Code to review its own code that it just generated,
like you just do slash review, it's going to be like, looks great,
ready for production, you know.
And then if you're like, no, it's not, you're like, you're absolutely right.
I need to write more test cases.
And so I think we've all been through that like gaslighting of the agent's
overconfidence and self-confidence in its work.
So I think just to connect these two things, I think it's so interesting,
people on your team who are like, I feel less confident in your PRs
and you're like, maybe me too.
It's just a lot more.
I'm like, that's totally fair.
And Wes saying like, exploring like this idea of adversarial reviews,
like is there a way to like up the confidence and the quality?
Yeah.
I'm really curious.
I think it connects back to something you said on Twitter,
like that reviewing code is the hard part.
We're not very good at like understanding code quality, I think, as humans.
And like, I think, well, I mean, I guess like the mentality I try to take
towards some of this stuff is like, one, if we put something up and it's,
well, first of all, it's, I feel like the thing where you have a cloud code
session that writes the code and then you create a separate session
and ask it to review it and it comes up with a bunch of valid feedback,
it's incredibly unintuitive if you know like nothing about how these work.
If you don't know anything about how the models work,
it's incredibly unintuitive that that could ever happen.
Because you're like, wait a second, it's the same agent.
Like it wrote the code.
Like how does it not find these problems?
And for me, that's actually a good example of trying to develop intuition
around like how these things are, the limitations that these things have.
Because it's like, yeah, it actually does kind of make,
it does make sense if you understand how they work.
But if you don't and you just view it as, I put things into the model
and it should like always like do the perfect right thing.
It's an oracle.
It's just, it's the truth oracle.
Yeah, if you view it in a certain way, it's like,
it's a very good example to me of like how you have to learn to use the tools.
Yeah, I mean, that's not like a hard thing to learn or to do,
but it's like, it's very unintuitive that that would be the case,
in my opinion, if you don't understand how they work.
I think, I mean, one thing I've tried to like internalize is,
and we're still like, I would say we as a team don't have answers
to any of this stuff.
We're still really trying to figure it out.
I think for me, again, it's like people need to be responsible
for their own code.
When you see the model do things wrong,
try to find ways to prevent that in the future,
whether it's like updating the CloudMD or the AgentsMD
or adding static analysis tooling.
We're actually probably turning on more Lint rules now than we used to
because, and we have like, even in Rust, we have like,
we've always used clippy pedantic.
It's like the most pedantic.
We have like a couple of rules disabled.
So like try to enforce things programmatically because the model's good
at following if you have something that's enforced programmatically
and it's getting diagnostics about it, it will fix those things.
Or try to give feedback in the CloudMD or similar.
Like we had all these problems.
They're not like problems, but it was like, you know, in Python,
oh, like Cloud kept adding like dunder all to like all these things
and it's like we basically never want to use that.
And like blah, blah, blah.
Or in Rust, it was like, oh, it's not using let, like let chains,
which are like a very new feature.
And so probably not as much of it in the training data
or it doesn't realize it has access to them.
So like putting that in the CloudMD.
And then over time, like trying to bolster, I mean,
this was important even before AI, but it's like trying to bolster,
like how can we get confidence in changes, you know, faster?
Like in, you know, in TY, for example, we have this,
we invested a lot in this like ecosystem report infrastructure.
So like every time we put up a change, we run over a bunch of projects
and we have like a really nice report that diffs all the diagnostics
and links to the lines of code and like helps you understand what's going on.
And like, and that's really helpful for building confidence in changes
because we can like click through that report and like see what changed
and try to identify problems.
Ironically, also a thing that's incredibly useful
is you give Claude that report and you ask it,
are these false positives or false negatives?
Go analyze the code.
Like we've probably saved, we're saving like hours and hours and hours on that.
Like try and understand whether these changes are false positives
or false negatives, or like we get this user report,
come up with a very minimal reproduction.
Like someone on our team yesterday was like,
I think this would have taken me six hours before.
And so, you know, that's, I guess another lesson is like
trying to find things that are off the critical path,
that aren't shipping production code that you can automate.
Yeah, and I've discovered just through trial and error
that different agents are better at different things.
Like for me, like the stuff that I'm working on,
it happens to be that, you know, Codex from OpenAI is a better code reviewer.
It's a lot slower.
Like I wouldn't use it for implementing necessarily
because it feels like, to me it feels slow.
And so, and I just prefer the ergonomics of Claude Code.
But I'm happy to let, you know, Codex grind all day doing my code reviews.
But one of the things that like,
maybe a segue into like a slightly deeper topic with,
I'm very curious on your take on like some ideas that I've been having lately.
But we're talking about code quality,
but the question I've been asking myself,
and it's been keeping me up at night is,
you know, if humans aren't...
Does it even matter?
I love you.
Maybe it's even this idea of code quality,
like this is something that only people care about.
And so like if people aren't reading the code anyway,
like what is the new code quality?
I know, I'm thinking about this a lot now.
Maybe what is good code quality for agents
is different than what it is for humans.
Like actually, maybe code duplication,
which I detest and whenever I see like,
no, no, this could be factored out into a helper function.
Like maybe the repetition is actually good for the agent.
Like it helps establish like,
what is the proper pattern for solving that problem?
And so, you know, I found myself being like,
well, should I refactor this?
It's like, is this going to improve or, you know,
hurt the agent's performance in the future?
Like I don't rightly know the answer to that.
And, you know, that's kind of the segue
into like kind of the, you know,
kind of the big idea that I've been,
that's been, you know, beyond that,
that's been keeping me up at night lately is like the more,
I feel like there was a big sea change
in like September, October when Opus 4.5 came out.
When, you know, it was evident that the quality,
like as I dabbled, I started using Cloud Code
and became an adherent in back in April.
And I was using Cloud Code to do, you know,
fairly significant changes in Positron,
which is Posit's data science IDE.
And I work on, have worked on the Data Explorer,
which is like an advanced data viewer within Positron.
And I found myself often struggling
because I'm bad at UI code and it like uses React
and there's a lot of like nitty-gritty React details.
And so whenever I had to touch like the UI layer
of the Data Explorer, I would find myself just slowing down
because I'm like, ah, like not only am I like,
do I not enjoy TypeScript at all,
but like there's all these foreign concepts.
I'm like, I'm not a front-end developer.
Like, you know, and so I find myself in the past
like being dependent on other developers to get help.
Like, I can't do front-end, please help.
And now I'm like, Cloud, please help.
And so I found that actually was productive.
And so I was getting a lot of stuff done,
but obviously with like a high error rate
and a lot of like just struggling with this massive,
because Positron is a fork of VS Code,
so it's a massive TypeScript code base.
Even getting to the point where I could orient Cloud
in the code base where it could like run the build system,
run the unit tests for that part of, you know,
this million-line code base was a lot of work.
But, you know, September, October,
there was like an evident sea change
where like, wow, no, no, like,
because I went from being a huge AI skeptic,
was not even using Cursor or Windsurf prior to last March.
I was still like Emacs, you know,
I was like writing code by hand like a caveman.
And so there was an evident sea change.
I'm like, okay, coding agents of the future.
And then September, October, like, okay,
like this is the way I should be writing code from now on.
Like I don't anticipate writing much code anymore.
But what happened as I moved on was like,
Python seems like the wrong language to be using.
And the reason that I started feeling that way
was because the code bases that I was creating,
and this was especially like personal tools and projects.
I just want to take a second to dwell on the big point you made,
which was existential, like what's our job?
I sound like a bodily response.
Well, sorry, my response was to the question of, yeah,
which I've also thought about before,
which is like if, like some of this stuff,
I mean, I tweeted about this the other day.
I was kind of kidding because like I occasionally,
I'm, for whatever reason,
I really like my code comments to be complete sentences.
Right, like psychopath.
And in a period, like stuff like that.
And so I find myself at the end of a session often saying like,
make sure all the comments, it's in my cloud.md,
but sometimes it doesn't do it.
And I'm like, make sure the comments are in periods.
Or like, I really don't like when you use like em dashes in comments,
like use a semicolon or a comma or a period or a parenthetical or whatever.
And it's like, okay, that's like actually a good example maybe
because it's like, does it matter?
Like, sorry, that didn't even matter before.
So maybe it's a bad example.
You're like, am I holding cloud back?
Yeah, well, no, but it's like, yeah, it's a question of like, okay,
like I don't really like when the model uses like dunderall.
Or like I don't really like in Python
when the model does like local imports.
Like sometimes it's just easier for it to import us.
Oh, I hate local imports, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And it's like, okay, I, you know,
we added a rule in our project where it's like you can't do that
except for certain modules where you have to do that
because they're big SDKs or whatever.
And so now it's like enforced.
But the question for me is like, does it matter?
And like I think, well, first of all, I absolutely don't know the answer.
And I think no one does.
And I think anyone who claims that they are confident
basically about anything that is going to happen in the next like six months
is mistaken.
But I think a couple things that have occurred to me maybe.
Like one, I do think like the notions of code quality will be really different.
Like I think what's good for agents and what's good for humans
like will be different.
I don't think we really know like what's good for agents yet.
And I think that itself will also evolve a lot
as the models get more capable.
Like things that are helpful maybe right now
might get completely solved by the next generation of models
with regards to like as in divergences around like code quality,
like duplication.
Like maybe I won't even say because I have no data on it,
but like maybe duplication is helpful right now
but then it gets solved by a future release.
This is a random thing.
Like I think it will change a lot.
I think we will need like much better ways to understand like code quality.
And I would love to see like actual quantitative metrics about this stuff
because every opinion that basically that everyone has in the industry right now
is just based on feeling, which is not nothing.
But it's like I'd love to understand like can we do long scale
like longitudinal experiments where we're like how does an agent
act more efficiently to get to the end result?
Like what are actual metrics that we can think about?
I also think this will like different software is built very differently.
Like that's even true today.
And I think that will continue to be true.
Like certain projects, you know, there are certain parts of my code base too
where I'm like way more hands off with the agents
and certain parts where I'm like way more hands on.
Like I think in TY, if we just like merged every PR that we had caught right,
it would completely destroy the project.
We would get a bunch of things wrong.
We would accumulate incredible debt, performance problems,
like correctness issues, like also no one would understand it,
which is a really big problem for that code base
because it's like a big, it's a compiler, right?
I mean it's a type checker, but it kind of looks like a compiler.
It's like a very sophisticated project.
In the PYX front end, if we just merged every PR that we had caught right,
things would actually probably be totally fine, right?
I mean that's a bit extreme, but my point is like those are very different.
Or like I have a bunch of experimental scripts that I use to like pull data
and stuff and it's like I care about that being correct
and so I should care about the correctness,
but I don't really care like what the code looks like.
It's really about the output artifact.
And so my point is just like I think different projects will have very different needs
and the way they are built will probably be different.
Just to put a cap on that too, it's so interesting to hear you talk about,
start with should sentences and comments end with periods.
You know like what's the quality of that to like,
should people be able to do this thing like a local import in a function
all the way out to like does it matter in Ty if we just accept Claude's commits
or does it matter in the package manager?
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean I think we're still just like figuring all this out.
All my opinions on this stuff, by the way, are like super different, like I said,
than they would have been like four months ago.
I mean for me, the prevailing feeling I've had lately is like
I think that there is like probably no more exciting time to be alive than right now.
I think honestly like I'm 40, so like I was 10 years old in 1995.
Because 1995 was like the big year of like the Internet became a thing,
like Netscape browser.
So like I was using computers and like there was an evident like a palpable feeling
of like the world is about to change in a very significant way.
For me, I had that same feeling like when I started doing Python,
I was like this language is, I think there's a world in which like it gets big
and the world is profoundly different because people are programming in this language
that is like fun and accessible.
Because it felt to me that programming was so like kind of painful
and like not accessible.
And so that was like the big thing was like why Python was so important
was because of its, and the reason it's so popular now
is because it's so ergonomic and fun to work in.
Like writing Python is fun, like the language is ergonomic,
like it's readable, it's concise.
And clearly like you know there were parts of Python that weren't very good
and you know Charlie and your team, you know you've fixed,
largely fixed you know some of the parts of Python that weren't working
like the packaging and distribution and like the fast installation.
And so now like the problem is Python has still got some issues
like Python distribution is still like you know it's not a static binary
like you can make in Rust or you can make in Go.
Python still like compared to compiled languages is relatively slow.
And so that means like running your unit tests,
you know the same unit tests we run you know written in Rust or Go
might take three seconds to run but it takes three minutes to run in Python.
And so now like viewed through the lens of like the agent
kind of grinding on the code base and iterating and figuring out
like what's the right way to solve this problem.
Like what I've observed in using coding agents is that the agent is like,
I've never like prior to this like I'd never felt like my MacBook Air
getting hot before because basically the agent is just like pinning my CPUs
all the time running all the unit tests.
And what I found and why I was saying a few minutes ago
that I'm starting to question whether I should be using Python at all
is because that like call like the agentic loop is slower in Python.
Like the agents are really good at writing Python
because they have massive amounts of training data and reinforcement learning.
And I do believe that like Python's readability and conciseness
is also a benefit for the LLMs generating that code.
But ultimately if you compare like the, you know,
agentic cloud code codex loop or agent of your choice loop
building a Go code base that solves one problem,
you compare that to the Python, you know, if you set two people to work
building the same project in Go versus the same project in Python,
what I'm seeing is that you can build the same project in Go faster
because the agentic loop is faster, like the tests run a lot faster,
a hundred times faster, but then also the distribution problem.
So if you build a Rust project, you end up with a static binary
that you can just CP over here.
But with Python still it's like, oh, like we got to like, you know,
we got to put it on the package index and like you got to install UV
and like even though UV's fast, like you still got to install it.
And so there's like all these caveats.
And so I do think that like I'm not of the opinion that AI
is going to cause massive job loss and like get put software engineers
out of the work.
I'm more of like the optimist, like we're going to end up with
10 to 100 times as much software and all these personalized,
customized tools and audiences.
But I do believe that like we're going to see on a proportional basis
less software being written in Python because of like that,
like agentic loop.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I guess I have a lot of thoughts on it.
I mean, I think that's like very plausible.
I think it's definitely possible that areas where you would have reached
for Python before, it's no longer the right fit.
I think that evolution might happen or might be happening,
like things like standalone CLIs or whatever else.
Because I think different languages will have different strengths.
And suddenly the calculus around how you choose what to build in
is very different.
And so it will just like naturally be the case that like some things
will be better for certain things versus others.
I do, I mean, I'm still sort of like figuring all this out myself.
I guess like one thing I think about a lot is I actually like haven't
really been like a huge Python defender as like a language in general.
I think the thing is part of why Python is so powerful is like just
like network effects and path dependence are like very strong.
And so Python has this huge scientific computing ecosystem.
And it's very hard if you want to do anything that involves any form
of scientific computing to use anything else.
And a lot of that will like continue to be true.
Like those things exist and they will continue to be critical.
I think the other is, you know, we certainly as a team want to figure out
like how can we make Python a great choice for agents.
And so like how should the language and the tooling evolve, right?
And like we thought, you know, for example, we thought a lot about
building our own like test infrastructure or even like should we do our own
runtime, like something that makes very different trade-offs.
Those are obviously all very hard problems.
But the question is like what if we wanted Python to be a great choice
or remain a great choice for agents.
Like I think we kind of have a responsibility to try to solve some
of those problems and like make it a better choice.
Like I'd love to do, you know, standalone binaries.
Like just for example, like we should absolutely.
Kind of like what you can do with like bun and Java.
We should absolutely just like make that like possible.
And there's no reason we can't.
It's just a question of like prioritization and I'm sure there will be trade-offs
and whatever else.
But, you know, I think what I would say is like we're trying to learn about
how to build software with agents and like what's required.
I think it'll probably impact our roadmap a lot in terms of the problems
we choose to take on.
I think it will also be the case that like the way people make decisions
about what programming language to use will be like super different.
It might not be the case that most people are writing most of their code
with agents this year.
I'm not sure if the distribution will happen that fast.
But like I think it's important to be when you think about building tools,
it's like that's like what software is going to.
Software is going to be like really different.
And so I want to fold that into our roadmap.
I want to fold that into how we think about what we're building.
Even if we choose to say like actually like we're going to build this other
tool that has nothing to do with Python.
Like I'm even open-minded to that because it's like what's just what's the
thing that's going to make people like more productive.
Yeah, I mean, but you're right.
I mean, you're absolutely right that I mean one of the, I mean,
Python has enormous inertia in the scientific world.
Yeah, yeah.
Most people listening know, but like I think almost all of the LLMs
and the AI labs themselves like, you know,
modern LLMs are all built with Python.
Yeah, I mean like entirely Python.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
All Python.
So it's PyTorch and it's Jax and even Google which has its own Silicon.
So Python is clearly not, you know, not going anywhere.
And I think the shift with agent ergonomics may influence like the
builders of those AI frameworks.
It may influence their future choices in terms of like where they build
the, you know, even, you know, even in the fullness of time,
I think probably engineering the building, the architects of the LLMs,
people building training, post-training, reinforcement learning,
the LLMs, the people writing that code increasingly,
they are going to be using agents to write that code.
And so at some point, you know, maybe it's like three years down the line,
maybe it's 10 years down the line,
I can imagine that we'll end up with like a whole parallel ecosystem of
like non-Python, you know, AI training frameworks, you know,
in a sense like maybe Google's already, you know, already working on it.
But for now, like the foothold that the kind of like the anchor that we
have through PyTorch and Jax and like the whole ecosystem of AI
frameworks for Python like that, you know, it's a juggernaut, right?
And there's already teams in place that are continuing to build and
maintain those libraries.
And so, you know, I think like some people might hear what I'm saying
and say, oh my God, is Wes saying Python's going to die?
I'm like, no, I'm not saying that at all.
Like, you know, I think if we look at like, you know,
if you look like the Stack Overflow language rankings,
you see like Python just, you know, emerged out of the 2000s.
And now it's just like this hockey stick of like, oh,
it's the most popular language, you know, by far.
And I think it will still remain, you know, you know,
the number one or the number, you know, number two or three language.
But I expect that we'll see, you know,
significant growth in other languages, you know,
but the amount of Python that's generated will be, you know, 10x or 50x or 100x.
Yeah, I mean, obviously I would say this because I'm working on a company that builds Python tooling,
but like I don't think Python's going anywhere.
But I do think that like the way that we choose like what we build with,
the things that make a language great, like all that will change a lot.
And like it even impacts how we think about things like today, obviously.
Like we're building, you know, we're building TY.
It's a type checker and a language server.
So, but there's a bunch of things we're building there where I'm like, wow,
like this is like really specific to how humans work.
Things like hover, like you hover over a symbol and like what does it show you?
Machine do hover.
Yeah, well, I'm like, it's like, oh, we're spending a lot of time on like really good hover.
And it's like, it does matter.
But like, you know, an agent will never use it.
Or even like auto completion, right?
Like that's actually, that's a very hard problem.
Like we're spending a lot of time on that.
And like, I absolutely think it's merited.
I think it's like good, important work.
Like we have to have those things.
It's a table, it's still a table stakes to be like a usable LSP.
We have to have like good auto complete.
But it is like, you know, the way that like agents would use that tool is going to be like really different.
And so, you know, at least I'm thinking about it a lot.
Like, you know, I think I've always tried to think ever since like AI became really usable.
I've just thought a lot about how can we make sure what we're building is resilient.
Because like we really cannot predict the future.
But like we can think about like what's going to be resilient and what's not.
So like static analysis, like having really good verification, like really fast verification.
Like that's, in my opinion, like very resilient.
Like as you write Python, I think like typing, for example, will only become like more important and more useful.
Because it's a very fast way to validate correctness.
And then package management.
It's like, okay, like I mean maybe there's a world where you have no dependencies.
And you're like building all of everything from scratch.
But like I think we're like much further away from that.
And so, you know, being able to install and manage your dependency tool chain.
Making it really easy to start and run your project.
Like those are things that to me, I feel like we're making very resilient bets.
But we also have to be thinking a lot, you know, just about how it's changing.
Yeah.
If I could just try to put a thread to it too.
Because I feel like all these points are so interesting.
And I hate to go back to it.
But this point of like starting it.
Should I put a period at the end of my comment?
Yeah.
We have dependencies tonight.
Like what's being like, should I just use Go for this?
Yeah.
And this fact that like agents, there's an ergonomics to what agents care about.
And what do you choose for humans versus machines is such an interesting topic.
And to your point, like what would be resilient?
What's going to endure, you know, five, ten years?
That's why it's an amazing time.
I don't know.
We don't know the answers to any of these.
We're just sitting here talking.
I mean, like I frankly find like the uncertainty.
Like I haven't felt, you know, been in this kind of state of like, you know,
just excited enthusiasm about what's happening.
I find it terrifying.
Yeah.
I mean, it's scary.
It's scary.
But I think that's part of what makes it so exciting is because it is also scary as like,
well, gosh, like, you know, this is, you know,
just even taking in what's happening on like a daily basis or a weekly basis.
Like I open Hacker News, like news.ycombinator.com when you're at them.
Like, oh, what fresh hell is being unleashed on us today?
Yeah.
You know?
But even like, you know, having wild thoughts, like, you know,
talking about IDEs, like I haven't touched an IDE in like two months.
Like the only reason I've opened an IDE is because there's still like IDE tooling
that is necessary for like, you know, if I'm working on Positron,
like you need to use the whole VS Code IDE tooling for debugging.
And like, yeah, there's still, you know, the need to like, you know,
sometimes there's a need to set breakpoints.
But even like maybe breakpoints are only for humans.
Like, you know, just agents got to figure out how to do that themselves.
Yeah, yeah.
And I think it's a very like, at least I feel,
it's a hard time to be a leader because like in any capacity.
And I, because I think we just like, there's so much uncertainty.
I think, I don't know, my approach there,
which I guess is the same as it's always been,
is just to be really honest and be like, this is what we think we understand.
This is what we don't.
Here's what I think we should be trying to answer.
Do you think, is that hard because like as a leader uncertainty is hard?
Or do you think that's hard because there's like something about the uncertainty
or like this situation?
Maybe it is a little bit of the latter because I think things are changing
really fast.
And so like there are lots of products that you could build today.
Like even if you said, okay,
we're going to like really focus only on building around like AI and agents.
There are lots of products that you would think about building today that
could be made completely redundant in like three months or something.
And so I think that, again, that's where, for me,
it comes down to like trying to build around resilience.
And it's like, I think the layer that we're at is a very good one for being
robust to change, but like, yeah,
there are lots of products that we might think about building today.
Like, I don't know, like what if we were like, oh,
we want to build like a code review tool and not to comment too much on that
example, but it's like, okay,
like how relevant is that going to be in like three years?
Like it's so, I think, you know, to some degree it's like uncertainty is hard.
To some degree,
I think it's just the change is so fast and the capabilities are changing so
much that maybe it is a little bit unique.
But so maybe kind of like a mix of both, you know,
as a leader, like you don't,
not that I'm like an amazing leader or super experienced leader or anything,
but like, at least from my, in my opinion,
you don't always have to have like all the answers,
but you have to have like some opinions and like a clear strategy to rally
around, even if it's like, get more information or like, or learn more.
I mean, how, how do you, I mean, so there's, you know, there's,
there's, you know, Charlie Marsh, the person,
but then there's also like Astro the company and the team.
So I'm curious like how, like how you as a,
the team and the company is, has changed, you know,
in the last six, nine months,
like in reaction to everything that's been happening.
I think like I'm seeing like all kinds of reactions from different companies
and teams.
And obviously there's a lot of new companies being created right now,
like AI agent native from the ground up, like, you know,
people are talking about like Y Combinator accelerator, you know,
it's like a startup accelerator talking about like, Oh,
95% of the code written by these companies is all AI generated.
And so many companies are starting scratch with this like totally AI native
agent native mindset. Whereas like, you know,
companies that have been around, you know,
or that are a little bit older, you know,
it could be a lot older or approaching it and adapting in different ways.
And so there's like internal ways of operating and business processes,
but then also like team culture and like how people operate.
And so it's like,
I feel like everything is being turned on its head and people,
every individual is adapting and changing their,
the way that they interact with the world of software engineering and open
source. And probably maybe after this, like, I do want to talk about kind of,
you know, the whole open source, you know, ecosystem aspect, but,
but I do want to hear about kind of like how,
how just the impact it's had on Astral,
the company and the team and, and, and your culture.
Yeah. I mean, I think like, thankfully,
I guess thankfully we haven't had to make too many like major strategic
shifts. Like,
I feel like the things that we were focused on remain have remained good
bets maybe just by chance.
But like,
I think a lot of it is actually cultural around trying to,
you know,
get people like curious and interested in experimenting with a lot of these
tools. So I've tried to do that a lot. Like we've set up,
cause across the team, like the adoption varies a ton.
Like there are some people who don't use this stuff at all.
And then there are people like me, I guess. And, and, you know,
maybe a few others who are on the other end of the spectrum where it's like
everything we're doing is there. And I think, you know,
a lot of that has been like getting, we're small enough, you know,
we're small and we're flexible, which is like a huge benefit.
Like I'd much rather be like a 20 person team than like a 200 person team
trying to figure out how to adapt. It's like way harder. But I think,
you know, we, we'll do these like AI,
basically AI knowledge sharing sessions where we bring the whole team
together and someone just like screen shares and they literally just like
walk through how they do their work. So it's just like, yeah,
this is like, I'll have like this open and then I'll do this and I'll do
blah, blah, blah. I mean, it's like pair programming, you know,
it's just like sharing how you work,
but like everyone has a super different thing.
And then a bunch of people have like reactions and we just like have an open
conversation about it. And so, you know,
just trying to like get people thinking about it and in a very,
I think a very genuine way, like, like the good thing I think about are,
are, you know, having a company culture like this is like, we,
we can come in and I can be like, yeah, I do like this, but like,
it kind of sucks. And like this, I've tried this,
like doesn't really work or like, well,
like it's not like we're sitting there going like,
this is the most amazing thing ever.
You have to use this right now or like you're about to be made redundant,
like your jobs and like, you know,
your job is gone or like programming is over. If you don't like,
it's really not like that. It's like, Hey,
we should all be like pretty curious about like what's happening here and
like blah, blah, blah. So, you know, I think,
I think another thing that's been cool is like we do,
we try to do a lot of, I mean,
we run the company like mostly asynchronously and we try and do a lot of
just like sharing and discord around like what's working and what's not.
So like, Hey, I built, I built this thing. It's been really,
especially for internal tooling.
That's been like a great test bed for us or tooling around PRs,
like the ecosystem stuff that I mentioned.
Like I think Claude created this like really nice report that, you know,
so it's not just a GitHub comment,
it's actually like an interactive report and you can click on it and that's
like super useful. And so like,
I think seeing wins like that come out in low areas that are kind of low
stakes, like all that's been helpful, I think for, you know,
getting people like interested. I mean, there's another part too,
which is just like access. Like how do you,
this isn't like a huge problem for us because we're a small team,
but it's like, how do you make it so,
how do you make it so like the bar to trying this stuff is very low.
There's like a lot of different tools. And so, you know, I,
we're basically like, you know, everyone at the company,
everyone on the team has a corporate card.
Anyone can just put like a Claude Max subscription on it and like no
questions asked. Yeah. It's like, I mean,
that's like an easy thing to do and that companies,
companies like should be doing. But, but,
but just making sure that there's like a very low bar to like trying things
out and, and sharing like what's working and what's not. Yeah.
Yeah. It's interesting to hear too,
like where you mentioned like this feeling of uncertainty and the challenge
as a leader in like building AI products.
But it's also interesting to hear like inside the company,
like how do you encourage like a culture of experimenting and like how do
you, yeah.
No, cause there are definitely people on the team who are like skeptical for
sure. Like, you know, our team, I mean,
it's probably doesn't represent like, you know,
an average sampling of like human beings across America or whatever,
but it's like,
we have programmers who come from like all different sorts of backgrounds.
And, and like, I don't know,
like ages or like eat programming ecosystems or like what they did before
or like whether they're self-trained or like, you know,
it's just like people have very different opinions about a lot of this
stuff. And so, you know,
I don't approach that.
And I think people on our team don't approach that from,
we don't approach that in like a combative way.
Like you have to be using this stuff or like blah, blah, blah.
I really want it to just be more like, okay, this is like, this is weird.
Like we have to like figure out like what we're doing. Yeah. Yeah.
So it's a little, I don't know. That's sort of like been my approach.
And I feel, yeah, I feel a lot more uncertainty honestly about like yeah.
Things like the open source and like the contributors and like how we manage
those interactions.
Like it is increasingly the case that we get these PRS that are like a lot of
work to shepherd and we don't quite know what to do with it yet.
And I did hear you like just to put a like spotlight on that.
One thing that struck me before is you mentioned like when someone opens a PR
and you're thinking about a response, I think you mentioned like you want,
you don't want to discourage them.
Like you don't want to give them a response that sends them away.
So yeah, I think hearing you say that,
like thinking about contributors in the context of not sending them away,
being like a really welcoming. Yeah.
That's always been a big part of the project for me is like we wanted to have,
we want to have, you know, a community where like if you,
even if we say no to whatever you're asking for, you should feel respected.
Like you didn't feel like we listened to what you asked for.
We thought about it and we gave you a reasonable rationale for why we
couldn't. And then obviously if we say yes, you know,
that's like a better always a better experience for people. But, but,
but that for me, I think that was like also a big,
it was something that created really positive feedback loops and like over the
course of the projects was,
I think we just created a community where people felt like we took them
seriously and like, you know, we're really responsive and, and,
and then I guess like you, sorry, I switched,
but you were talking a bit about like today,
today, like in open source with AI,
these contributions now as part of a welcoming community.
It's very hard. I don't really know how to navigate it. I mean,
we also get things like issues, you know, that are clearly written by,
and there are all these tells that is written by an LLM,
like lots of headers, like lots of bulleted lists with like bolded items,
like lots of parentheticals, like maybe like some emojis,
things that are way too thorough, like a human would never do it this way.
Like it not only talks about like the problem,
but also like the proposed solution and like blah, blah.
It's like a human would just not do that.
And like when we get issues like that,
like we don't have any policies on this yet,
but like sometimes we'll basically just be like was,
or even when we get a PR now, sometimes we'll be like,
was this written by an LLM? If so,
can you just talk us through like how you verified correctness and like blah,
blah. And I don't really know. It's just like, it is just a,
it's just like things that used to make sense,
like don't quite make sense anymore.
Even sometimes now in the context of open source and code review,
sometimes it's like I put up a PR, you know,
that I wrote with Claude and then hopefully did a bunch of work,
you know, a bunch of iteration.
Like hopefully it's not just like a first pass,
like slop thing that I put up.
Someone puts comments and then a decent chunk of the time,
what I'm doing is I just copy and paste the comments into Claude code,
right? And have Claude fix things. And I review, I paste one comment,
you can have Claude code, read the comments using the GHC.
I know, I know, I know. But, but I will basically,
sometimes I will basically, I'll just like copy, you know,
I'll copy the comment I'll put in the cloud code and then I'll,
I'll do it one at a time. Like ideally,
like I'll look at what changes and then I'll commit that and then I'll go to
the next one, blah, blah. So I'm like,
I am being thoughtful about what it's doing, but like, it's pretty,
that's pretty weird. Like, why am I like, why are we working that way?
Like there's a bunch of connectivity that's lost. Right. And like,
like I just think like the way that that whole loop works will be really
different. And, and the way that like the open source contract works,
it's sort of like has to change because, you know,
it used to be that like writing the code was the hard part.
And now it's like putting up code that passes the tests.
Let's just put it that way is like not hard. You had validating,
especially in a project like UV, just for example, it's like, okay,
I'm going to write some code. And then like, okay,
that has to work on, you know, on windows, macOS Linux.
It has to work on maybe people have all sorts of different drive setups.
Like maybe it has to do with like sim links or hard links or like,
there's all these things that are actually very hard to test.
And we have no way to really verify that.
It reminds me, I, I, maybe you've,
you've read this famous essay from, from years ago called,
I believe it's called the Lisp Paradox.
I don't think I've heard of it.
So I'll summarize it for you.
So the idea of the Lisp Paradox is that it's trying to reckon with like,
why, why did Lisp like the Lisp ecosystem that includes scheme.
And there was a whole like Lisp thing in the eighties,
like why did Lisp not become more popular?
And so the idea is that, that,
that problems that are technical problems in other programming languages are
social problems in Lisp.
And so the idea was that individuals could craft these solutions to
problems in this elegant way all by themselves.
And so the barrier to,
to for an individual to be able to create their own personalized solution to
the problem was not as high as it would have been in like C or in, you know,
COBOL or, you know, other languages of the, of the 1980s.
And so the, the, the outcome of this, this is obviously back in the 1980s,
you know, when programming was a lot harder.
So the outcome of this was that people were less incentivized to collaborate
because they could just do their own thing. Right.
And I feel like now we have that problem,
but worse because you know, it's like, why, why bother collaborating?
Why bother doing open source when you can just fork the project and make it
exactly the way that you want. Yeah.
And so even like the incentive to participate and to propose changes and have
to interact with humans to get changes into a project, I, you know,
I'm seeing, you know, people just, you know, fork it,
fork it, fix it and move on. Maybe they'll throw up a PR.
Maybe, maybe they won't, but it's, it's,
I think that list paradox problem like now, like we have this problem of now,
like the challenge is how do we continue to incentivize that,
that collaboration, that healthy collaboration,
which yields communities that work together to solve problems and collaborate
over a long period of time when now like the code is super cheap and the cost
of saying like, well, you know, that, you know,
to help you like I'm not going to collaborate with you because it's easier
to talk to my agent than it is to talk to a human on GitHub.
And so I'm just going to go solve the problem and move on because I've got a
job to do. Yeah.
The whole like kind of cost benefit of open source has completely changed.
And so I don't mean to catastrophize, but you know,
I'm seeing people talking about all the end of open source and it,
you know, they may not be wrong. Like I, I, I don't know.
I think these are also,
I think like one challenge with that and with a lot of these things is like
there are,
there will be compounding effects over time that we won't see acutely like,
okay, one person forking a project is one thing.
But then over the course of a year or two or three years,
like everyone forking and no one building like new foundational tools is like
the, what are the effects of that? You know,
everyone's working and like introducing their own CVS, you know,
like security. Yeah. There's like, there's just like, and so I,
I don't know. I think it's,
it's important to be thinking about right now.
I don't know what to do about it. Yeah.
It is so interesting. Like with you mentioning Lisp and I think sometimes too,
it's called the curse of Lisp where like, it's like too much of a good thing.
I think the last day may actually be called like the Lisp curse or something.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think of like, I'm thinking of Python paradoxes,
the program essay, I think it's like the Lisp curse or something like that.
I think it's so spot on though that like,
it's like a good thing that to be really have a really powerful language and want
to roll something.
And it's like a good thing to have a really powerful coding agent.
But it is so interesting,
like your points about like being social or like needing to reach out,
like, like as hints of the curse, like you mentioned,
like working on positron.
So this tool and when you need to work on react stuff before,
I think you mentioned like you'd have to grab someone on the team and now you
can kind of just like fire it off on your own, which right.
I feel like has that like big curse energy.
It's like a good thing, but it.
No, it's like invariably the thing that I do will be,
will be worse because I also don't, I don't know react.
And so I don't have the ability to read the output and judge like,
is this the right way to solve the problem? Yeah.
And so essentially you're pushing off that,
that burden onto code reviewer, which has more, you know, more experience.
And so, yeah, I don't have a good answer.
It's, it's, but it's you know,
I view it as more of a opportunity than, than I, I'm not,
certainly not catastrophizing, but it's like,
I think it's good that we're aware of it and we're asking these questions
because you know, for us, like as open source maintainers,
like I'm very passionate about open source.
You're very passionate.
We're all, we're all open source package maintainers.
And I love open source.
I love what I love working with the community.
I love working with other people.
And so I'm optimistic that we'll be able to create, you know,
new tools and solutions to incentivize human collaboration.
Yeah. Yeah.
And I think, I mean,
it's been so helpful to hear Charlie like the what you're doing in the
ecosystem and like keeping it welcoming.
And I think also just thinking like in terms of like, yeah,
what you build next and how you think about focusing on humans and agents.
Yep.
I mean, I think there's like so much to chew on just,
just in this space of like how will people interact with code?
And I think y'all have built such great tools for running really helpful
things fast,
whether it's like linting or packaging and running scripts,
which is like UV I'm running all day, every day.
So I'm, yeah,
I'm so excited and curious to see what you all do and,
and embrace I guess both the human and the machine part of the future.
I guess closing out,
I'd be curious what you're maybe most excited about for the like coming
years.
Well, I think, I mean, I guess there's a broad theme.
I think like the way we build software will change a lot and I'm hopeful
that like I've people keep like quoting this back at me because I tweeted
this thing that was like,
I feel like working with agents is a lot more productive,
but a lot less fun.
And that's what you're excited about that.
I, I, I think I'm hopeful that we will find, you know,
we will sort of solve some of the things that feel,
make it feel less fun.
It's not, it's not about having fun.
Like, okay, having fun is great.
I love having fun.
You know, everyone loves having fun.
But I think for me,
it's more that like the way that we build right now is there's a lot of
friction between this like new world and the current world that we're in
this potential new world in the current world that we're in.
And I think,
I think we'll just learn a lot more about what building software should look
like. And I'm, I'm excited for that.
I think in the Python world,
this is fairly niche,
but like we've been working a lot on these standards.
Like they are largely born out of the question of like,
how do we make it easier to install PyTorch?
Because I spend a lot of time helping people install PyTorch and making that
easy. And the PyTorch ecosystem is absolutely enormous.
And so that, you know, that for me,
like the standards we're pushing on there around wheel variant,
what we call wheel variants,
I think is kind of like an exciting change that should it be accepted,
I think will change a lot of what it feels like to work in Python and kind of
enable us to solve some of the pain points that we just have to live with
today and can't solve in UV.
So, you know,
that's one like sort of like more near term thing and one sort of very long
term, like big picture thing.
I love, no, I love, I love the two of like,
how can this be fun and this very like specific detailed pain point.
I think it does.
I mean,
I think it is like spot on kind of astral that like a lot of these tools have
made things way faster and funner.
And there's, there's been so much thought into these tools.
So I'm so excited.
I appreciate that.
Thank you.
Well, thanks.
Thanks for coming on.
I know we went super long,
a lot to think about.
I felt short.
Yeah.
I've got a lot of, it was super fun.
Thank you.
Thanks so much for having me and just for the, you know,
I'm for the great questions, the great perspectives from both of you.
And yeah, I'm excited to see what the next year brings.
The test set is a production of positive PVC and open source and enterprise
tooling, data science software company.
This episode was produced in collaboration with creative studio.
For more episodes,
visit the test that.co or find us on your favorite podcast platform.